# October 4, 2024

## Changeset

- I've cleaned up mirrorverse to reflect the new way of building models.
- I decided to get started with collecting the environmental data I'm going to use with the movement model 
(and perhaps the depth model in the future).
- Stumbled across Copernicus Marine Services which provides a catalog of cleaned, dense, environmental data 
(in contrast to Google Earth Engine's raw telemetry that requires a great deal of cleanup oneself). 
- Went through their demos online only to discover that the demos are old enough that they demonstrate tools
that are now deprecated. 
- The rest of the week basically became a struggle in how to use their `copernicusmarine` package in a way 
that doesn't crash my machine or result in the slowest downloads ever known to humankind. 
- The first issue was that `copernicusmarine`, when used in a notebook, will crash the notebook even if you're
pulling a few MB of data (which makes no sense). So I turned to the CLI tool which seemed to be working better
(although I need to go back and see if the package was just have trouble when run through jupyter...).
- The second thing I've learned is that there are some severe limitations on the throughput you can get from one
of their files (in terms of download from the cloud). Answer to this seems to be downloading from multiple files
at a time (which you get for free if you use `copernicusmarine` the right way). 
- The third issue is that the data is so voluminous that I need an external drive right now to pull things down. 
Weirdly though `copernicusmarine` causes my system to crash if I try to download directly to the external drive
which means I have to download to the local machine in pieces and then transfer to the external drive separately
in order to not clog up my machine's SSD. 
- Fourth issue then is the IO bottleneck posed by moving single files - thankfully this can be solved by moving 
multiple files in parallel using several cores but this required additional scripting. 

## Up Next

At this point I think I understand the problem and the tool well enough that I'll be able to write up a script
to wrap `copernicusmarine` in such a way that I don't need to care about any of these issues ever again but I'm 
still in the process of writing that script. So new data will have to wait till next week!