# August 16, 2024

Ended up reading through the theory section of Peter Turchin's _Complex Population Dynamics_ which is a synthesis 
of representations in terms of cybernetics and systems theory. In addition to this spent a lot of time trying to see
if I could dream up a synthesis of my own to no real avail. From the reading, my own thinking (past just this week), 
and my exposure to a variety of other models through the years I think it's probably unlikely that there is some kind
of singular "class" of equations that represent ecosystems. It's not impossible but given the amount of effort that
has already gone into looking for them I just think it's unlikely. 

However on taking a step back I'm not even sure it's strictly necessary. At least from the point of view of improving
things as they currently stand. My hint here is that of all the ecological mishaps I know of most of them are not
particularly subtle. The dust bowl had a pretty obvious cause. Mangroves getting devasated by shrimp farms has a 
pretty obvious cause. The cod collapse once again had a pretty obvious oversight and does (I think at least) the
herring collapse in the Atlantic. I suspect there's a lot of mileage to be gotten from just doing better risk 
management, and perhaps that's all you really need... 

However hindset is 20/20 and it's easy to pretend like there's a pattern when you haven't stamped it out yourself. 
So what I'd like to do on the side of my schoolwork is work my way through various ecological stewardship mishaps 
and determine what could have been done given what was known. Hopefully out of this "management anthology" I'll be 
able to find a common pattern that can then be applied to ecological management in general. If successful this would
become the management process I've been looking for and I can look to see how my current research is couched therein.
