# June 21, 2024

## Changeset

- My road down how to speed up convergence in the non-parametric log odds model ended up in a dead end. See the only appendix [here](https://github.com/networkearth/mirrorverse/blob/4f10e474f3b1325586118a682ecf59e637885df6/report/Report.pdf) for details. But looks like non-parametric log odds model just don't work (or at least not the kind I'm using).
- Therefore I went ahead and figured out how to do this using deep learning instead. Description of the strategy is [here](https://github.com/networkearth/mirrorverse/blob/4f10e474f3b1325586118a682ecf59e637885df6/report/Report.pdf) and an example notebook is [here](https://github.com/networkearth/mirrorverse/blob/4f10e474f3b1325586118a682ecf59e637885df6/docs/studies/KerasLogOddsModel.ipynb). Turns out this works tremendously well!
- The model referenced above predicts depth class occupance probability (were a depth class is something like "between 25 and 50 meters") using month, daytime(bool), progress through the period (day or night), and elevation. I then predicted on all H3 cells in the data for January and February and made a [little video of <25m depth occupancy](2024_06_21/kepler.gl.html.zip). Redder cells have higher occupancy, bluer cells lower occupancy and then daytime is represented by yellow borders whereas night is red. Time is in UTC in case that seems wrong/confusing. Anyways it's definitely worth a look (although note it takes a while to load in browser) because the model's clearly learned a diurnal pattern as well as coastal vs deeper sea patterns. 

## Up Next

- Now that I've got a working model I need to make the data that comes out of it easy to navigate/digest so I'll be working out a data model/arch that can be used to make slicing and dicing easy. 
- Will also be working to incorporate the feedback around the proposal (thanks Andy!). 
