# July 26, 2024

## Changeset

- Read [An Introduction to Cybernetics](https://www.amazon.com/Introduction-Cybernetics-W-Ross-Ashby/dp/1614277656) which has been fantastic for giving me the language and frame of mind used in systems thinking.
- Used the langauge there to "redefine" the classic fisheries system (catch, recruitment, mortality, and age cohorts) and have found a couple of interesting properties already.
- First these classic systems can be fully described by a linear transducer.
- Second they all can have some manner of control only using one "regulator" variable.
- Third the presence of noise is really just a one way coupling of a Markovian machine to an underlying noiseless transducer which seems to lead to nice properties about convergence to equilibrium even under noise.
- Am now investigating the presence of multiple equilibrium points (for example a system that can kill of its population) and how to avoid such "regime shifts" even under the presence of noise.

All in all the language and ideas of cybernetics is allowing me to vastly simplify the way one looks at these control systems 
and as a result point out pretty simple but (I think) powerful results about what is actually required to obtain a specific 
level of control over such systems. Once I've understood the regime shift aspect of things and any ideas that fall out of that
I'll go ahead and right this up in more formal detail. 

## Next Steps

- Understand the math of "regime shifts".
- Write up findings more formally. 
