# February 7, 2025

## Notes from the Week

### Questions I Want to Tackle

With my realization that there's no real need for spark, `mimic` stands as everything I need to do the bulk work of simulation. Therefore it's time to put on my management cap and start playing around with what you can do with the data I'm now in a position to generate. 

- **Reducing Mortality on Migration**: One cool question would be whether one could instantiate a moving window of closures to protect migrating fish. Even cooler is I think I could do this with the data we presently have. 
- **"Aggregation Devices"**: By looking at what the fish end up attracting to one could recommend ways of avoiding hotspots and thereby reduce bycatch (or even provide protected areas).
- **Management Area Size**: I can't really do anything based off of source regions but I could explore how dispersed the fish really get to show how dangerous fishing a single region might be. Specifically if I can define how "large" a mixing region really is I could tell how restrictive regulation would need to be to protect groups that "settle" somewhere.
- **Stratification**: Similar to the second but I might be able to use this data to recommend areas that should be considered "strata" based off of real fish movement and preferences. 

I'm going to start with these and we can add to the list as we go along if needed. 

But... before any of this I'm going to clean up my model code in mirrorverse so future me actually knows what on earth I was up to. 