This is a project within a project. Descent into a problem is, if left to itself, a descent into madness. As one gets further into the details not only does one's perspective become mired in those details alone but one's motivations switch from para-sympathetic to sympathetic. The latter leads to the inevitable poor decision making that comes from any kind of flight or fight response while the former means that only a tiny portion of one's perspective is actually in any kind of use. 

Therefore it is absolutely critical to periodically (every few days or so) force oneself to desist on the problem in question and allow one's perspective and motivation system to reset. And this, in my experience, usually takes around a day to really clear up. It's kind of like a problem hangover, you've got to give things time to resettle. 

However, given it is broadened perspective that is desired, I realized that these "off" days would be the perfect time to seek a perspective from someone else. That is, instead of working on the problems on my plate, to dig into a book/class/etc. that is given by someone else. And as has become so apparent to me, the only way to really incorporate these perspectives into one's self is to regurgitate them in one's own words. If you cannot teach it, you do not know it. 

So my plan is to bundle all of this up into a simple goal that I will chip away at over time - to gather all the perspectives I can on managing ecological resources and as I'm going to coalesce that understanding into a book that summarizes my perspective and understanding of resource management. And I'll use this to break away from the descent into madness that would come from focusing on my projects and problems alone. 